[Music]
To understand climate change, think of
the game Tetris. For eons, Earth has
played a version of this game with
blocks of carbon. They enter the
atmosphere as carbon dioxide gas from
volcanoes, decaying plant matter,
breathing creatures, and the surface of
the sea. And they leave the atmosphere
when they're used by plants during
photosynthesis, absorbed back into the
ocean, or stored in soil and sediment.
This game of Tetris is called the carbon
cycle, and it's the engine of life on
Earth. What's the connection to climate?
Well, when that carbon dioxide is in the
air, waiting to be reabsorbed, it traps
a portion of the sun's heat, which would
otherwise escape to space. That's why
carbon dioxide is called a greenhouse
gas. It creates a blanket of warmth,
known as the greenhouse effect, that
keeps our Earth from freezing like Mars.
The more carbon dioxide blocks hang out
in the atmosphere waiting to be cleared,
the warmer Earth becomes. Though the
amount of carbon in the atmosphere has
varied through ice ages and asteroid
impacts, over the past 8,000 years, the
stable climate we know took shape,
allowing human civilization to thrive.
But about 200 years ago, we began
digging up that old carbon that had been
stored in the soil. These fossil fuels,
coal, oil, and natural gas, are made
from the buried remains of plants and
animals that died long before humans
evolved. The energy stored inside them
was able to power our factories, cars,
and power plants. But burning these
fuels also injected new carbon blocks
into Earth's Tetris game. At the same
time, we cleared forests for
agriculture, reducing the Earth's
ability to remove the blocks. And since
1750, the amount of carbon in the
atmosphere has increased by 40% and
shows no sign of slowing.
Just like in Tetris, the more blocks
pile up, the harder it becomes to
restore stability. The extra carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere accelerates
the greenhouse effect by trapping more
heat near the surface and causing polar
ice caps to melt. And the more they
melt, the less sunlight they're able to
reflect, making the oceans warm even
faster. Sea levels rise, coastal
populations are threatened with
flooding, natural ecosystems are
disrupted, and the weather becomes more
extreme over time. Climate change may
affect different people and places in
different ways. But ultimately, it's a
game that we're all stuck playing. And
unlike in Tetris, we won't get a chance
to start over and try again.